The interaction of the shoulder joints during arm elevation is commonly assessed using the scapulo-humeral rhythm (SHR) (==Codman 1934==). This ratio describes the contribution of the glenohumeral joint (GH) to the arm elevation compared to the acromio-clavicular (AC) and sterno-clavicular joints (SC). An atypical scapulohumeral rhythm is usually associated with a musculoskeletal disorder of the shoulder, whether or not there is pain {==Robert-Lachaîne, 2014 #121==}. While the standard evaluation of the SHR is done with a goniometer, a novel technique that benefits from three-dimensional motion capture has been developed by ==Robert-Lachaine (2014)==. By iteratively resetting the joints to their reference orientation, this technique calculates the contribution of each shoulder joint to the thoraco-humeral angle {==Robert-Lachaîne, 2014 #121==}. However, as the SHR implies a ratio ($\frac{\text{GH}}{\text{SC+AC}}$), numerical instabilities can occur if the denominator approaches zero. In our experimental settings, the SC-AC contribution approximates zero in the early lifting phase (==FIG==). Such numerical instabilities make SHR analysis ==risky== during a manual handling task involving the upper limb.

Fig. 1: Mean (plain lines) and standard deviation (shaded areas) joint contributions over the time of the glenohumeral (GH), sternoclavicular (SC) and acromioclavicular joints (AC) to the arm elevation. Contributions approach zero (dotted line) between 20 and 40% of the trial. Consequently, numerical instabilities may occur in this area.

By extension and more generally, a similar method could be used to calculate the joint contribution to the elevation of an object rather than arm elevation. This is particularly interesting during a manual handling task as we can evaluate the amount of box height achieved by each joint. As an example, the effect of sex on the joint contributions during a lifting task has been investigated. The contribution of the upper limb joints were compared between women and men lifting a 6 kg box. In the group of joints considered, women show a greater glenohumeral contribution to box height (approximately 15% higher in women compared to men) in the last half of the movement (==FIG==). 

Since the mass of the box represents a greater fraction of the body mass in women (women being lighter than men) for a lower lifting strength capacity (==Yehoyakim 2016, Coté 2012==), women could have used compensatory strategies to decrease shoulder contact forces, such as legs, trunk or elbow contributions. Instead, our results show that women use more their glenohumeral joint to lift the box. These results highlight sex-related differences in lifting strategy with the same absolute mass of 6 kg, similarly to previous results observed for the back and lower limbs (==Plamondon, 2014==). Such analysis could be used to identify poor techniques in ergonomic contexts, or more generally to evaluate joint functions.

Fig. 2: Mean (lines) and standard deviation (shaded areas) joint contributions over the time of the wrist and elbow joints (WR-EL), glenohumeral joint (GH), sternoclavicular and acromioclavicular joints (SC-AC) and the rest of body (RoB) to the box height in women (dotted lines) and men (plain lines). A Hotelling’s t-test showed a significant difference between men and women across all variables and additional post-hoc t-tests on each variable highlight a significant difference in the glenohumeral joint from 40 to 98% of the trial (gray rectangle).